
Mini-project: Baby Names

    🏠
    🏫
    👨‍🔬
    👨‍🏫
    📚
    📓
    💬
    📷
    👨‍💻

In this mini-project, we will be working with a data set of baby names in France. It contains the list of all baby names registered in France, year by year, from 1900 through 2020. There are two data sets: one aggregated to the national level, and another with data by department. Your goal is to create 3 different visualizations around these data, each focussed on answering different kinds of questions about the data:

    Visualization 1: How do baby names evolve over time? Are there names that have consistently remained popular or unpopular? Are there some that have were suddenly or briefly popular or unpopular? Are there trends in time?
    Visualization 2: Is there a regional effect in the data? Are some names more popular in some regions? Are popular names generally popular across the whole country?
    Visualization 3: Are there gender effects in the data? Does popularity of names given to both sexes evolve consistently? (Note: this data set treats sex as binary; this is a simplification that carries into this assignment but does not generally hold.)

This assignment consists of several parts: in the first part, you will sketch design alternatives for different visualizations that can help address each set of questions. In the second part, you will implement that visualization using one of the tools from the class lab assignments. In the third part, you will refine these solutions.
Grading

Your grade will be based on the final implementation that you will hand in at the end and on your participation in the forum. It is based on:

    Does the visualization convey they answer to all of these questions?
    Does the visualization clearly convey the answer to each of these questions?
    Is the visualization clear and does it have good aesthetics?
    Your group’s self-critique and analysis of your submitted visualizations.
    (Individual): Your thoughtful, constructive critiques of the other groups’ designs (see below).

Week 1: Design sketches

Your final visualization should enable the user to answer all of these questions with a single interactive visualization. If your design does not allow this, try to think of alternative designs that will help do so. The focus here is on design alternatives for your visualizations.

You may hand draw your designs or use software as you prefer. For each visualization, you may—and are encouraged to—submit more than one solution. In your submission, you should include a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of each design.
What to turn in

    Your sketches
    A discussion of the strengths of each design
    Submit your solution here.

Week 2: Initial Implementation

For each of the three visualizations above, choose one of your designs to implement, using one of the tools from our class labs. Hint: The Names hints notebook has some suggestions of some useful auxiliary data sets and shows how to create a chloropleth map in Altair.
What to turn in

This is a two-part submission. The first part of your submission will include:

    A link to a Git repository with your code. This link will not be shared with your fellow students. Submit your link here.

The second part is a forum post with:

    For each visualization:
        A collection of screenshots or short videos demonstrating each.
        A description of why you think this solution is appropriate and effective at answering these questions.
        A discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of your solution.
        (If you really are stuck answering all these questions in a single visualization, you may submit multiple solutions; be sure to compare and contrast them.)
        Submit this part as a forum post here.

Week 3: Comparison and refinement

You should now have access to all groups’ forum posts. Read them and look at their solutions. Add any comments on their solutions. Be sure to be positive in addition to suggesting improvements. Think about how to critique a visualization that we saw in class. Note: comments are visible to the whole class and should be individual. Be constructive.

Does what you’ve seen influence the choices you’ve made for your solution? Now go back to your solution and refine it as you wish. That means that you may incorporate ideas that you have seen from the other groups into your original solution.

You don’t need to turn anything in besides your individual comments.
Week 4: Refined solution

You should now have a finalized implementation of your refined solution.
What to turn in:

    A link to your Git repository with your code. Submit a new link here.
    An updated blog post that presents screenshots/videos of your new design, along with a discussion of what has changed since your initial implementation. Why did you make the changes you did? Do you find this improved your design? Add this discussion as a reply to your initial post.

voila aussi context : 

Passer au contenu principal
Moodle IP Paris

    Accueil
    Tableau de bord
    Mes cours
    Aide et assistance

10
Moodle IP Paris

    Télécom Paris
    2025-2026
    FI
    Diplôme d'ingénieur
    2A

2025/2026 - CSC_4IG07_TP - Visualisation

    Cours
    Participants
    Notes
    Compétences

Résumé de section

    Overview
    Tout replier


        Announcements Forum

        The goal of information visualisation is to help the user to represent, explore, and manipulate data in order to better make sense of them and to act upon them.

        This class generally consists of:

            Class lectures
            Readings
            Short homework assignments
            Lab assignments
            Mini-projects
            A final exam

        Lectures are generally in-person.  Refer to the class schedule in Synapses for time and location.  There are three types of quiz in this class: 1) reading and 2) lecture quizzes that you must take before their associated deadlines, which appear here in the Moodle, and 3) in-person pop-quizzes on paper in class.  These quizzes will be unannounced and will occur during the first five minutes of class.

        Lab sessions will meet during the 10:15 am reserved time slot.  They are designed to be done at your own pace.  Attendance will be taken during these lab sessions.  Please contact the instructors in advance if external constraints will prevent you from attending.  See the page Lab Sessions and Office Hours for more information.

        Quizzes, Homeworks, and Lab assignments are individual assignments that you must complete on your own by their respective deadlines.

        Only the projects are to be done in groups.

        Lab Sessions Page
        Office Hours

        I generally hold office hours twice a week (subject to constraints).  You can find their schedule here.
        Reading List Page
        Grading & Late Policy Page
        Plagiarism & AI Policy Page
    Week 1: Intro
        Intro Slides Fichier
        Intro Slides (printable) Fichier
        Intro Lecture Quiz Test
        Homework 1: Design explorations Atelier

        Refer to the assignment description here.

        We will submit Part 1 of the assignment in lab.  Once all assignments have been submitted, come back and rate your peers’ solutions as your Homework 1.

        Reading: Value of InfoVis Fichier
        Reading : Munzner, Ch. 1 URL
        Reading Quiz Test
    Week 2: Visual Mappings

        Tips for watching the videos:
            These videos were initially recorded during the Covid lockdowns and may contain references to that period in time.
            Open the videos in a new tab
            Activate theater mode:
                Click the rectangular icon on the bottom right of the videos so that the full-screen button (the next one over) really goes full-screen.
            Adjust the video quality based on your bandwidth:
                Click the gear icon to select a different video quality if the automatic selection does not work for you.
            It is possible to download videos instead of streaming them:
                Below the videos, click the “…” icon just next to the “Partager” (or “Share”) button.
        Videos
        2a — Visual Mappings (5m) URL
        2b — The Temple of the Five Graphics (3m) URL
        2c — Graphs on Rails, Planes (9m) URL
        2d — Geospatial Maps (7m) URL
        2e — Networks & Diagrams (6m) URL
        2f — Symbols & Text (2m) URL
        2g — Infography (5m) URL
        2h — Univariate Data (3m) URL
        2i — Bivariate Data (5m) URL
        2j — Trivariate Data (2m) URL
        2k — Multivariate Data (8m) URL
        2l — Hypervariate Data (3m) URL
        2m — Parallel Coordinates (3m) URL
        Visual Mappings Lecture Quiz Test
        Lab Session


        The lab session is scheduled for Friday from 10:15 until 11:45, but you are free to work on it on your own schedule.
        Installing Altair on your machine Page
        Lab: Hello, Altair! Devoir
        Readings & Homework

        See below for assigned readings, their associated quiz, and for this week's homework assignment.
        Reading: Bostock, Ogievetsky, and Heer: D3 Fichier
        Reading: Segel and Heer: Narrative Visualization Fichier
        Visual Mappings Readings Quiz Test
        Homework 2: Find an interesting visualization Forum
    Week 3: Tasks
        Tasks Slides Fichier
        Tasks Slides (printable) Fichier
        Task Lecture Quiz Test
        Lab 2: Apple Mobility Trends Devoir
        Reading : Munzner, Ch. 3 URL
        Task Readings Quiz Test


        Course workload questionnaire (optional) Feedback

        Please help us get a better idea of how much time you are spending on this course by filling out this anonymous questionnaire.
    Week 4: Perception
        Perception Slides Fichier
        Perception Slides (printable) Fichier
        Perception Lecture Quiz Test
        Milestone 0: Choose a group Choix de Groupe
        Mini-project 1: Baby Names Devoir
        Readings

        There is no reading assignment this week.  Much of the content covered in this week’s lecture can be found in Munzner, Ch. 5.
        Optional Reading : Munzner, Ch. 5 URL
        Perception Reading Quiz Test

        There is no reading this week.  This bonus quiz is thus entirely optional.  You have one attempt.  It can only help your grade if you take it.  There is no penalty if you get a bad grade on it or if you do not take it.  Note: this quiz has a hard deadline.  No late tests are possible.
    Week 5: Graphs & Trees
        Graphs & Trees Slides Fichier
        Graphs & Trees Slides (printable) Fichier
        Graphs & Trees Lecture Quiz Test
        Implementation Git link Devoir
        Implementation discussion Forum
        Readings

        This week, there is only one reading: Munzner, chapter 9.  This provides a complementary view of different strategies for visualizing graphs & trees, and also talks a little more about some layout methods.
        Reading : Munzner, Ch. 9 URL
        Graphs & Trees Readings Quiz Test

Mentions légales
